# Java EE7: JAX-RS 2.0 Async Request processing

Java EE7 added support for asynchronous request processing of REST requests in JAX-RS 2.0. This sample contains a few variations to illustrate how to use async request processing in JAX-RS 2.0 applicaitons.

* [Building with Gradle](#building-with-gradle)
* [Building with maven](#building-with-maven)
* [Downloading WAS Liberty](#downloading-was-liberty)
* [Starting the server](#starting-the-server)
* [Using Eclipse and WebSphere Development Tools (WDT)](#eclipse--wdt)

## Building with Gradle

This sample can be build using [Gradle](http://gradle.org/).

```bash
$ gradle build publishToMavenLocal
```

In addition to publishing the war to the local maven repository, the built war file is copied into the apps directory of the server configuration located in the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg directory:

```text
async-jaxrs-wlpcfg
 +- servers
     +- jaxrsSample                        <-- specific server configuration
        +- server.xml                          <-- server configuration
        +- apps                                <- directory for applications
           +- async-jaxrs-application.war  <- sample application
        +- logs                                <- created by running the server locally
        +- workarea                            <- created by running the server locally
```

## Building with maven

This sample can be build using [Apache Maven](http://maven.apache.org/).

```bash
$ mvn install
```
 In addition to publishing the war to the local maven repository, the built war file is copied into the apps directory of the server configuration located in the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg directory:

```text
async-jaxrs-wlpcfg
 +- servers
     +- jaxrsSample                        <-- specific server configuration
        +- server.xml                          <-- server configuration
        +- apps                                <- directory for applications
           +- async-jaxrs-application.war  <- sample application
        +- logs                                <- created by running the server locally
        +- workarea                            <- created by running the server locally
```


## Downloading WAS Liberty

There are lots of ways to get your hands on WAS Liberty. Note that you will need a version of Liberty that has support for Servlet 3.1, JAX-RS 2.0, EJB Lite 3.2 and CDI 1.2 for this sample, as it has a little bit of all of those (Java EE 7 Web Profile will do).

To download just the WAS Liberty runtime, go to the [wasdev.net Downloads page][wasdev], and choose between the [latest version of the runtime][wasdev-latest] or the [latest beta][wasdev-beta]. You can also download Liberty via [Eclipse and WDT](#eclipse--wdt)

There are a few options to choose from (especially for the beta drivers): choose the one that is most appropriate.
* There are convenience archives for downloading pre-defined content groupings,
* You can add additional features from the repository using the [installUtility][installUtility] or the liberty-maven-plugin and [Gradle plugins](https://github.com/WASdev/ci.gradle).

[wasdev]: https://developer.ibm.com/wasdev/downloads/
[wasdev-latest]: https://developer.ibm.com/wasdev/downloads/liberty-profile-using-non-eclipse-environments/
[wasdev-beta]: https://developer.ibm.com/wasdev/downloads/liberty-profile-beta/
[installUtility]: http://www-01.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/#!/was_beta_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.nd.multiplatform.doc/ae/rwlp_command_installutility.html


## Starting the server

You can run the server directly from the command line, or use our liberty-maven-plugin and Gradle plugins, or you can use [Eclipse and WDT](#eclipse--wdt).

Once the server has been started, go to [http://localhost:9082/jaxrs/](http://localhost:9082/jaxrs/) to view the sample.


### Running on the command line

Based on the server directory generated above, use the following to start the server and run the application:

```bash
$ export WLP_USER_DIR=/path/to/sample.async.jaxrs/async-jaxrs-wlpcfg
$ /path/to/wlp/bin/server run jaxrsSample
```

* `run` runs the server in the foreground.
* `start` runs the server in the background. Look in the logs directory for console.log to see what's going on, e.g.

```bash
$ tail -f ${WLP_USER_DIR}/servers/jaxrsSample/logs/console.log
```

*Note/Option:* The maven target and Gradle clean task will clean server output (logs and workarea, etc) from the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg directory, however, if you wanted to maintain strict separation between what is checked into async-jaxrs-wlpcfg and what is generated by a running server, you could also specify the WLP_OUTPUT_DIR environment variable, e.g. into the maven target directory.

```bash
$ export WLP_OUTPUT_DIR=${WLP_USER_DIR}/target
```

### Running with Gradle

The liberty [Gradle plugin](https://github.com/WASdev/ci.gradle) can also control and manipulate the server for use in automated builds to support continuous integration.

### Running with maven

The liberty-maven-plugin can also control and manipulate the server for use in automated builds to support continuous integration.

* TODO: more here. I know, you're impatient. Stop gnashing your teeth at me.


[ [back to top](#java-ee7-jaxrs) ]

### Eclipse / WDT

The WebSphere Development Tools (WDT) for Eclipse can be used to control the server (start/stop/dump/etc.), it also supports incremental publishing with minimal restarts, working with a debugger to step through your applications, etc.

WDT also provides:

* content-assist for server configuration (a nice to have: server configuration is minimal, but the tools can help you find what you need and identify finger-checks, etc.)
* automatic incremental publish of applications so that you can write and test your changes locally without having to go through a build/publish cycle or restart the server (which is not that big a deal given the server restarts lickety-split, but less is more!).

Installing WDT on Eclipse is as simple as a drag-and-drop, but the process is explained [on wasdev.net] [wasdev-wdt].

[wasdev-wdt]: https://developer.ibm.com/wasdev/downloads/liberty-profile-using-eclipse/

#### Clone Git Repo

If the sample git repository hasn't been cloned yet, WDT has git tools integrated into the IDE:
1.  Open the Git repositories view
* Window -> Show View -> Other
* Type "git" in the filter box, and select "Git Repositories"
2.  Copy Git repo url by finding the textbox under " HTTPS clone URL" at the top of this page, and select "Copy to clipboard"
3.  In the Git repositories view, select the hyperlink "Clone a Git repository"
4.  The git repo url should already be filled in.  Select "Next "-> "Next" -> "Finish"
5.  The "sample.async.jaxrs [master]" repo should appear in the view

#### Import Gradle projects into WDT

This assumes you have the Gradle Buildship tools installed into Eclipse Mars.

1. In the Git Repository view, expand the jaxrs repo to see the "Working Directory" folder
2. Right-click on this folder, and select *Copy path to Clipboard*
3. Select menu *File -> Import -> Gradle -> Gradle Project*
4. In the *Project root directory* folder textbox, Paste in the repository directory.
5. Click *Next* twice
6. Three projects should be listed in the *Gradle project structure* click *Finish*
7. This will create 3 projects in Eclipse: async-jaxrs, async-jaxrs-application, and async-jaxrs-wlpcfg

#### Import Maven projects into WDT

1.  In the Git Repository view, expand the jaxrs repo to see the "Working Directory" folder
2.  Right-click on this folder, and select "Copy path to Clipboard"
3.  Select menu "File" -> "Import" -> Maven -> "Existing Maven Projects"
4.  In the Root Directory textbox, Paste in the repository directory.
5.  Select Browse... button and select Finish (confirm it finds 3 pom.xml files)
6.  This will create 3 projects in Eclipse: async-jaxrs, async-jaxrs-application, and async-jaxrs-wlpcfg

*Note:* If you did not use Eclipse/WDT to clone the git repository, follow from step 3, but navigate to the cloned repository directory rather than pasting its name.

#### Create a Runtime Environment and a Liberty Server

For the purposes of this sample, we will create the Liberty server (step 3 in the wasdev.net instructions) a little differently:

1. Create a Runtime Environment in Eclipse
    1. Open the 'Runtime Explorer' view:
        * *Window -> Show View -> Other*
        * type `runtime` in the filter box to find the view (it's under the Server heading).
    2. Right-click in the view, and select *New -> Runtime Environment*
    3. Give the Runtime environment a name, e.g. `wlp-2015.6.0.0` if you're using the June 2015 beta.
    4. Either:
        * Select an existing installation (perhaps what you downloaded earlier, if you followed those instructions), or
        * select *Install from an archive or a repository* to download a new Liberty archive.
    5. Follow the prompts (and possibly choose additional features to install) until you *Finish* creating the Runtime Environment
2. Add the User directory from the maven or Gradle project
    1. *Right-click -> Edit* the Runtime Environment created above
    2. Click the `Advanced Options...` link
        3. If the `async-jaxrs-wlpcfg` directory is not listed as a User Directory, we need to add it:
            1. Click New
            2. Select the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg project
            3. Select Finish, OK, Finish
        4. You should see the `async-jaxrs-wlpcfg` listed under the Runtime Environment in the Runtime Explorer view.
3. Create a Server to represent our application and maven configuration in Eclipse
    1. From the Runtime Explorer view, *Right-click* on the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg user directory associated with the target runtime, and select *New Server*.
    2. The resulting dialog should be pre-populated with the jaxrsSample Liberty profile server.
    3. Click Finish

#### Running application from WDT

1.  Select the "async-jaxrs-application" project
2.  Right-click -> "Run As..." -> "Run On Server"
3.  Select the "WebShere Application Server under localhost" folder, and select "Finish"
4.  Confirm web browser opens on " http://localhost:9082/jaxrs/" with 5 hyperlinks to run samples


[ [back to top](#java-ee7-jaxrs) ]

## Tips

* When importing the existing maven project into Eclipse, Eclipse will (by default) "helpfully" add this project to an (extraneous) ear. To turn this off, go to Preferences -> Java EE -> Project, and uncheck "Add project to an EAR" before you import the project. If you forgot to do this, just delete the ear project; no harm.

* If you use bash, consider trying the [command line tools](https://github.com/WASdev/util.bash.completion), which provide tab-completion for the server and other commands.


## Notice

© Copyright IBM Corporation 2015.

## License

```text
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
````
