* Control the server [directly from the command line](#running-on-the-command-line) for manual testing.
* Use the [Gradle](#running-with-gradle) or [maven](#running-with-maven) to control and manipulate the server for use in automated builds to support continuous integration.
* Use [Eclipse and WDT](/docs/Downloading-WAS-Liberty.md) for development in an IDE with live, incremental updates to your application without restarting the server

## Running on the command line

Based on the server directory generated above, use the following to start the server and run the application:

```bash
$ export WLP_USER_DIR=/path/to/sample.async.jaxrs/async-jaxrs-wlpcfg
$ /path/to/wlp/bin/server run jaxrsSample
```

* `run` runs the server in the foreground.
* `start` runs the server in the background. Look in the logs directory for console.log to see what's going on, e.g.

```bash
$ tail -f ${WLP_USER_DIR}/servers/jaxrsSample/logs/console.log
```

## Running with Gradle

The [Gradle plugin](https://github.com/WASdev/ci.gradle) can manage the server using the following operations:

* TODO: more here. I know, you're impatient. Stop gnashing your teeth at me.

## Running with maven

The [maven plugin](https://github.com/WASdev/ci.maven) can manage the server using the following operations:

* TODO: more here. I know, you're impatient. Stop gnashing your teeth at me.

## Additional Notes

:star: *Note:* The maven target and Gradle clean task will clean server output (logs and workarea, etc) from the async-jaxrs-wlpcfg directory, however, if you wanted to maintain strict separation between what is checked into async-jaxrs-wlpcfg and what is generated by a running server, you could also specify the WLP_OUTPUT_DIR environment variable, e.g. into the maven target directory.

```bash
$ export WLP_OUTPUT_DIR=${WLP_USER_DIR}/target
```
